---
title: Lost - Katy Perry
layout: post
---

<iframe style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; display: block" width="420" height="315" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/Y86wHUigPZw" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
<hr style="border-top: 1px solid #BABABA">

You know how they say if you tell yourself something long enough, it becomes true?  For years, Katy Perry was the one modern pop artist I had liked on Facebook, as a joke.

I tricked myself into thinking maybe she was kinda sorta okay.  On a whim, I decided to look up "Hot N Cold" on YouTube.  Next thing I knew, I had downloaded her discography.  (Legally, if anyone important is reading this.)

Listening to the One Of The Boys album one evening at 2 AM, I was drawn out of my Team Fortress 2-induced trance by the powerful track "Lost."  Let's see if I can figure out what makes this track special.


Chords
---
### Intro
<pre>
|C       |F   Bb  |C       |F   Bb  |
|I       |IV  bVII|I       |IV  bVII|
|+--+----|...
</pre>
The song starts out with some simple acoustic guitar, with the strum pattern specified above by + signs, accompanied by some subtle bells and delayed electric guitar.  Already the song stands out by not only throwing in a chord outside the key of C, but almost "admitting" its presence, by having the bell melody use the Bb note.
### Verse
<pre>
|C       |F   Bb  |C       |F   Bb  |C       |Am      |G       |F       |
|I       |IV  bVII|I       |IV  bVII|I       |vi      |V       |IV      |

|C       |F   Bb  |C       |F   Bb  |C       |Am      |G       |E       |E       |
|I       |IV  bVII|I       |IV  bVII|I       |vi      |V       |V-of-vi |-       |
</pre>
Unike the bells, Perry's vocal melody does not take advantage of the Bb chord, and avoids any kind of B, flat or natural, altogether.  Later, she sings a B natural on the G chord.  Before she can commit to anything, the F reigns her back with a V-IV-I cadence.

In the second iteration, she breaks free using the E.  Like the Bb, the E does not belong to the C key, but unlike the Bb, this chord marks a transition to the next section. The E allows Perry to sing another B natural, which propels her into the chorus.  The extra measure of E causes the verse to total to 17 bars. It serves as another break from the verse.

Note that I marked the E as a V-of-vi.  Normally in pop, the III (E) is used to pivot to the vi (Am).  Instead, she slides right on up to the IV (F), and it makes no sense and I love it.

Maybe an e minor would have made more sense.  It's in the key, and still has contains the B natural.  But if you listen: (soundcloud link in the works)

it's not as powerful a transition, is it?  The G# serves to provide some tension moving into the chorus, and also catch those of us off-guard who were expecting the vi (Am).

### Chorus
<pre>
|F       |G       |C       |Am      |F       |G       |
|IV      |V       |I       |vi      |IV      |V       |
</pre>
Now instead of avoiding a kind of B, the melody centers around the B natural, though I use "centers" loosely.  Perry jumps all over the place, from A up to E and back.

The placing of the lyrics on the downbeats really makes it feel like she's pleading with us: have you EVer BEEN so LOST?
### Link
<pre>
|C       |F   Bb  |
|I       |IV  bVII|
</pre>
This link is just a unit of the intro again.  It also adds to the previous chorus to make an even 8 bars.
### Verse
<pre>
|C       |F   Bb  |C       |F   Bb  |C       |Am      |G       |F       |
|I       |IV  bVII|I       |IV  bVII|I       |vi      |V       |IV      |

|C       |F   Bb  |C       |F   Bb  |C       |Am      |G       |E       |E       |
|I       |IV  bVII|I       |IV  bVII|I       |vi      |V       |V-of-vi |-       |
</pre>
This time around, we're graced with some backing vocals.  They don't add too much (just Cs, Fs, and Gs), but a pop song must have layering, so layer it shall.
### Chorus
<pre>
|F       |G       |C       |Am      |F       |G       |C       |Am      |
|IV      |V       |I       |vi      |IV      |V       |I       |vi      |

|F       |G       |C       |Am      |F       |G       |
|IV      |V       |I       |Am      |IV      |V       |
</pre>
This chorus feels cut short, and for good reason.  We've been robbed of a full two bars.  This kind of wonky non-multiple-of-4 sectioning is not typical of pop songs.  In my opinion, it adds to the whole "Lost" idea.
### Bridge
<pre>
|C       |F   Bb  |C       |F   Bb  |C       |Am      |G       |Esus4 E |
|I       |IV  bVII|I       |IV  bVII|I       |vi      |V       |V-of-vi |

|F       |G       |C       |Am      |F       |G       |C       |Am      |
|IV      |V       |I       |vi      |IV      |V       |I       |vi      |

|F       |G       |C       |Am      |F       |G       |Am      |Am      |
|IV      |V       |I       |vi      |IV      |V       |I       |vi      |
</pre>
The chorus ends the same way the previous did, but Perry alerts us that this time is different by singing a new melody over the first four measures.

Here the E is used to de-escalate, as opposed to how it's used in the verses.  It'd be hard not to de-escalate at that point, following Perry's screams that would make my choir teacher roll in his grave if he were dead.

After the E,  we're left with a softspoken Perry and simple quarter note keyboard chords.  This all builds up to one final mini-climax, as if now finally she's let everything out.

It's worth noting in how many Perry uses these chords.  This is, of course, the 50s Progression (I vi IV V), but starting on the IV.  In the second line above, it's quiet and unmoving.  In the third line, it's a roar of frustration.
### Outro
<pre>
|F       |G       |C       |F   Bb  |C       |F   Bb  |C       |F   Bb  |...
|IV      |V       |I       |IV  bVII|I       |IV  bVII|I       |IV  bVII|... 
</pre>
She gently asks us one final time, before letting the song fade out the way it started.

Final Thoughts
---
The worst part about analyzing this song was trying to go back to listen to certain parts but getting lost because all three parts kind of sound the same.  So she got me there.
<br /> 
Typical pop song checklist:
<li>50s Progression</li>
<li>Lotsa synth layering</li>
<li>Verse-Chorus-Verse-Chorus-Bridge</li>
<li>"ONE and two AND" measure emphasis</li>
<br /> 
This song definitely reminds me of Queen somehow, but I'm not sure how.  She's stated that Queen was one of her influences, so I'm not crazy.  Maybe it's the passionate, virtuoso singing, or the sexiness of the singer.

<hr style="border-top: 1px solid #BABABA">
</div>

